---
title: Some Notes on Agency at Work
subtitle: Agency, autonomy and control
layout: blog
---

I've been trying to make sense of my work recently. Launching the SEO MBA kind of bifurcated my possible futures into "consulting" and "course creating" - with varying audiences and industries. My consulting work is very much broader than just "SEO consulting" these days, and yet the SEO MBA places me firmly back in that context and industry.

How to reconcile these possible futures and possible selves?

Through a bunch of conversations - maybe the common throughline here is agency.

Specifically - the idea of increasing agency for people's work selves. This feels promising as a potential north star because it neatly aligns with the big things I'm spending my time on now:

1. Consulting work: about bringing clarity to senior executives. Gaining clarity and building new capabilites is a lot about agency. Getting clients to be unblocked and gain clarity around their strategic roadmap
2. SEO MBA teaching: the course Executive Presence is really about teaching skills that people need to increase their perosnal agency. There are plenty of stories of people taking the course and then getting a new job. This is more than just "upskilling" - it's about increasing agency.
3. Indie consulting book: helping indie consultants 

So in effect you could argue that I've been focused on increasing agency for: clients, SEO professionals and indie consultants.

Huh. Neat. I certainly get a kick out of this kind of work and this kind of thinking.

💼 💼 💼


This idea of **agency at work** is interesting to me. How much agency do you believe you have? The event horizon of your own agency at work is an interesting concept. What are the boundaries of who you belive you can become?




💼

Maybe there's a 2x2 here. Something like this inner/outer skills/meaning matrix:


Where:

* Low Meaning / Inner World: This is the kind of raw skills of personal productivity. Within your own personal sphere can you optimize your ways of working? This might involve organizinig your work, inbox zero, clearing up your calendar, etc. I think this kind of work is appealing when you're early in your career because it doesn't require anyone else giving you permission and can be done in almost any context. Level up your own personal systems.
* Low Meaning / Outer World: This is your ability to create systems of influence. To be able to improve the systems and processes around you. This is appealing as you get more senior and develop more "executive presence". This kind of work scales all the way up to formal management roles where imposing clarity, systems, process and order onto teams and systems is appealing.
* High Meaning / Inner World: This is the idea of doing day to day work that is stimulating. Are the tasks in front of you energizing? If you like spending time in spreadsheets are you spending time in spreadsheets? If you like desining, are you spending time in Figma? And further - are spreadsheets important to the work you're doing? Is the work you respect, respected by those around you?
* High Meaning / Outer World: This is the big one of "working on things that matter"

💼 💼 💼

