---
title: Blogging Streaks
subtitle: Again and again and again
layout: blog
---

I've been writing at least one blog post a week for the last 10 weeks. This idea of streaks is completely inspired by Matt Webb who would totally be on the cover of Blogging Weekly (if such a magazine existed).

Matt Webb's current streak is 112 weeks so I'm only about 100 weeks behind...

Matt Webb wrote [15 rules for blogging](https://interconnected.org/home/2020/09/10/streak) when he was early in his current streak. I don't really have any rules but I thought I'd post up some provocations:

## 1. Keep a drafts folder

If you want to write more blog posts you have to *start* more blog posts. I have a drafts folder with over 50 blog posts in various stages of completion. Some of these are only a few sentences, or only a headline. But sometimes things I start drafting 3 years ago suddenly have their time and I publish them.

## 2. Inquiry over insight

I much prefer to read blog posts that open up a line of thinking rather than close it down. Trying to "solve" things or provide the "definitive" anything is a recipe for bland content. If you're writing consider opening up the questions - I like to write blog posts where the reader comes away with more questions than they started with!

## 3. The unit of measurement is the conversation

Analytics. Ugh. The only *good* measurement of blogging is how many conversations did you have off the back of it? Sometimes a blog post with only a few hundred page views will trigger lengthy twitter DM conversations, or a podcast appearance, or a coffee meeting. This is my north star for blog posts - will it trigger a conversation?

## 4. Write for an audience of one

If you're stuck - write a blog post that you want a specific person to read. This is a writing tip from Steinbeck, if you want someone to find a post interesting, write it for that one person. An obvious extension of this is you should always have at least one person that you're excited to email your latest post. If there isn't a single, specific person that you're excited to send your post to then chances are no one will find it interesting...

## 5. Make it distinctive

In a sea of generic, bland content you need to stand out. The best way to do this is to lean into your quirks, your weirdness, your strangeness, your passions. In short, don't hide the [blogpunk](https://tomcritchlow.com/2019/05/17/blogpunk/). Focus on writing in your own tone and voice - not in someone else's. Like doodling in your notebook? Include some photos of your notebook!





https://pketh.org/redesigning-an-app.html
Weeknotes - building in public

https://gist.github.com/genmon/c75480d3e525b43c2e1e135d7cbb697f?utm_source=pocket_mylist

https://github.com/tomcritchlow/tomcritchlow.github.io/blob/master/_includes/streak.html
