---
layout: blog
title: Why I Became a Recruiter
subtitle: And how it  grew out of full stack marketing consulting
---

It was a lonely Tuesday, the 24th of Feburary 2015. I left the office late, without fanfare. It was my last day at the company and no one seemed to notice. This was a client of mine, I'd been working out of their office 3 or 4 days a week for two months as their interim VP of marketing. Sooner than expected they found someone to come on board full time and that was the end of my engagement.

I'm dramatizing slighlty but the insight is true - there's a gap between consulting and in-house work. It's often postioned as an either/or choice when in fact the truth is more nuanced. Most of my consulting engagements should naturally end in me hiring someone to continue the work and processes that I've helped to set up.

After all, strategy without execution is worthless.

## The Lightbulb Moment

The second half of 2015 I landed on a client who was looking to buid a marketing team from the ground up. I walked in the door slinging strategy advice and walked out the door with a clear vision that they needed to hire -  needed to build a new marketing team to support the kind of growth they wanted. So I got stuck in. I believed in the company I was working with, thought they had a great team already and they paid well. I reached out to my network to help find the right people for them.

This engagement helped me realize that 

## How I Got Here

I started my career in SEO - the nuts and bolts of keywords, analytics, link building and content. I came to New York in 2011 with Distilled, to open a new office and build a new outpost for the company. Looking for something new I jumped to the Creative Lab at Google. Worked there for a while and then in late 2014 I went out on my own.

The past year and a bit I've spent consulting. Mostly marketing consulting, sometimes SEO consulting. I had high hopes for the kind of work I'd be able to get out of the gate and the lesson learned in 2015 is that spreading your wings is like growing a flower - consistent, slow, deliberate work. But sped up over a timelapse it's incredble the range of motion and the amount accomplished.
 

TL;DR - full service marketing plans. Including hiring people.

What have I been up to?

Insights:
- companies oftne don't know how to hire people
- hiring is hard and time consuming
- making a mistake hiring people 
 
## How I got here

Client out in Seattle helped to find and source candidates.

## Consultant vs Recruiter?

It's important not to choose too soon. Explore the options. Just because you're struggling with growth doesn't mean that hiring a "VP of growth" will solve your problems.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">Every mid-stage startup in NY is looking for a head of marketing these days... and almost none of them know what they&#39;re looking for.</p>&mdash; chris muscarella (@cm) <a href="https://twitter.com/cm/status/682215063017623552">December 30, 2015</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

## The 18-month mistake

What about hiring the wrong VP of Marketing? What does that do for you?

## Giving a shit about the people

How do you care more closely about the people involved?
I'm going to start exploring options for being involved post-hire too. Long term relationships with my clients where I can shepherd and guide their strategy as well as find and build the team.

The first 90 days are critical 

## Get in touch then!

People is the engine.




Email this post to:

Amit
Andrew (betaworks)
Arnold
Jonathan libov
Taylor Greene
Pond5/Wistia VC
Gary Chou

