---
layout: blog
title: Three years on the road
subtitle: A personal note on how it's all going...
---

Three years ago today I walked out of Google into the crisp autumnal air of independence. My friend Jonathan hosted a quit party at the Royal Palms shuffleboard club and I was suddenly out on my own.

I've said before that being independent feels a lot like being on a permanent road trip - a feeling of ultimate freedom interlaced with a nagging anxiety of being adrift with no stable home.

(For reference, here's my update last year from [two years on the road](http://tomcritchlow.com/2016/10/24/2-years/))

Overall year 3 has been great and I feel very lucky and fortunate to be able to pay the bills doing what I do and still get home most days to read Roxy some Harry Potter before she goes to bed.

One of the things that has helped sustain me has been the focus on deep, embedded engagements with clients. I've got several multi-year retainers that are still going strong and this helps not only pay the bills but also provide a sense of stability.

Most of 2016 and 2017 was dominated by two large projects both of which wrapped up this summer. So the road ahead is opening up again. Time to wind the windows down, put on the roadtrip mixtape and go where the wind blows!

The positioning for my work that I came to last year is holding up pretty well. Here's how I describe what I do when asked:

*For content companies looking to invest in growth I’m the secret weapon embedded in your organization to build & lead strategic initiatives.*

Some quick highlights from the past 12 months:

- Travelled to Australia, Deroit, Seattle, San Diego, Delaware, Wisconsin, Connecticut & Manhattan for work. For the big trips I took the family with me and I feel lucky to do some interesting travel without having to live life on the road.
- Watched my daughter learn to walk, talk, eat, laugh, joke, hurt, sleep, not sleep and so much more.
- Got back into the swing of conference speaking with a presentation at SearchLove in San Diego, a company-wide presentation for a client in Sydney and a future trends presentation for a private equity firm and their portfolio companies in Wisconsin. 
- Continued to blog regularly-ish. I've published 10 posts in 2017 and I've averaged about one a month for the past two years. Sometimes I wish I wrote more but I'm pleased with the longevity of it. Blogging continues to be one of the most rewarding ways to use the internet for me.
- Helped multiple clients think through branding, positioning and mission/vision work. While I certainly wouldn't say I'm an expert here I know enough to be able to provide meaningful insights for clients and have been lucky enough to work alongside excellent partners such as [Midnight](https://gomidnight.com/) where the scope is beyond my skills.

So what's top of mind for me as I head into the next year? I've broken it down into 5 obsessions:

## Obsession #1: Workshops

All business problems are ultimately people problems. I hate thinking that strategy work = presentations and documents. Sure, I love putting a good spreadsheet or presentation together but what really lights me up is getting in a room with the key stakeholders and really getting to the bottom of the key challenges and defining how we might be able to respond.

Almost all of my client engagements now start with an initial workshop (in person preferably) that allows us to cover a lot of ground and really dive into the business without ignoring the weird, beautiful multi-faceted people involved in the process.

Not only that - but it's too easy to *think* you know a client's business but if you're not close enough to smell them you'll miss the necessary nuance needed to execute. I'm constantly guided by this lovely definition of strategy from Stripe Partners:

>"strategy as an unfolding network of people, shared experiences and artefacts that is constantly being remade".

Yes. Yes!

## Obsession #2: Independence

Over the past three years I've found myself a merry little band of independents. Those peeking through the cracks of late stage capitalism into the future - what Franco Berardi calls “fractals of time and pulsating cells of labor.” I've talked before about how useful it is to have a network around you when you're out on your own but specifically I'm starting to assemble a set of peers who are doing similar work to me - of course the joy is that everyone is doing their own unique blend of work but there's enough overlap to feel like we can draw on each others experience.

I'm excited to keep connecting the dots here and helping those just starting out as well as learning from those who are far more experienced than I am. Perhaps look for an unconference of independents in 2018 if I can find the time... In the meantime, if you're an independent consultant drop me a line, I'm always keen to chat.

For more here see my post [a fieldguide for independent strategy consultants](http://tomcritchlow.com/2016/12/14/fieldguide-independent-consulting/).

## Obsession #3: Effective consulting

I'm increasingly coming to the idea that effective strategy consulting is all about **ways of seeing** (the phrase taken from the John Berger [TV series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ways_of_Seeing)). As a consultant your job is to bring new ways of seeing to the client and then turn those insights and realizations into strategy and execution.

I touched on this above with the workshops but how do you actually effect change within an organization? Anyone who tells you it's easy is lying. For years I've been trying to go beyond just producing reports and documents but I still feel like there's a lot to learn and explore here.

I dived in deep to explore this idea in my post [the consultant's grain](http://tomcritchlow.com/2017/07/18/the-consultants-grain/).

In particular - I'm really interested in how much content plays a role in the spread of ideas and how you can use that to your advantage. I also coined the term *consulting fast and slow* which I really likes and sums up a bunch of my thinking on this...

I went on to write about some ways I've been thinking about the critical question of telling a client their content is not good enough. I wrote up that thinking here: [how do you measure good content](http://tomcritchlow.com/2017/10/03/how-do-you-measure-good-content/). Still looking for interesting ways of looking at a business in ways that can be reflected back to the organization in meaningful ways.

## Obsession #4: Branding in the age of content

So much of my work involves content. From media companies looking at their business model to entire businesses built around producing and managing content to small startups investing in content marketing as a way to build their brand. But so much of content on the web is deeply flawed.

As a society we're pawing our way through glossy content in familiar containers in a seamless attention-less way and brands are producing content in every more normalized ways designed for metrics and analytics. Where does brand and the gut-wrenching longevity of emotion live in this world? It's a provocation I'm struggling with but I think I'm starting to make some real progress and the more I look at it the more I think almost everyone is doing it wrong. That's exciting. It either means I'm slowly going crazy, or... I'm on to something.

Watch this space. But there's some notes here: [branding in the age of content](http://tomcritchlow.com/2017/06/27/branding-in-the-age-of-content/).

There's so much more here.

## Obsession #5: Weird work

Last year I wrestled with the idea of building a brand for my consulting work. Ultimately I decided not to go down that path but there's still a nagging feeling that there's more interesting work to be done under a label that isn't just my own name. Like a record label or an art collective or a creative studio there's the potential to carve out creativity into more weird forms than what I'm doing right now.

I've been inspired recently both by friends who are building creative studios and by the radical architecture movement of the 60s that saw groups like Archigram and Super Studio emerge - these hybrids of professional studio practice, art show, philosophy, small batch publishing, zines and just generally weird work.

So I'm starting to explore more creative avenues and partnerships to do some more provocative work. Maybe it's co-creating with clients on collaborations? Or producing a zine internally for a client? Or maybe it's becoming a something-in-residence at an organization to explicitly explore those alternative areas...

Who knows where that goes but I'm going to try and get a little more weird in 2018...

## Thank you

Finally - thank you to everyone who came along for the journey with me. Friends, peers, blog readers, breakfast companions, late night whisky drinkers, clients and more. Thank you! Wouldn't be here without you.
