---
layout: blog
title: The Improvisational Nature of Consulting
subtitle: Is consulting hard? Yes! and...
---

One of my most challenging consulting projects was back in 2011, I'd just opened the office for [Distilled](http://www.distilled.net) in New York and we sold an SEO consulting project to a business out in New Jersey who created websites at scale. If you work in SEO in New York you probably know who I'm talking about.

Every week I'd travel on-site to New Jersey and spend the day in a meeting room surrounded by executives, product managers and - crucially - a consultant from a big consulting firm (I think it was Bain but I actually can't remember). No one around the table knew SEO as well as I did, but they sure did have strong opinions.

A question would arise about the cost of doing link building. An exchange might go something like this:

Consultant: We need to know how much it costs to build a link for our financial models
Me: Ok, first we have to have a discussion about the *kind* of links we want to build
Consultant: 

Meanwhile, over lunch in the cafeteria one of the in-house SEO folks turned to me covertly and showed me xrumer - a piece of desktop software that builds thousands of links through automated submissions and so on.

Not only was Xrumer the 

## Consulting Is Improv



## Good Consulting is Improv Without the Bullshit

You could also call this codified experience. Or wisdom. The ability to synthesize new data into old situations and be *right*. Or at least directionally correct.