---
layout: blog
title: Atemporality of Corporate History & Strategy
subtitle: Zero history of the organization
---

How does an organization "think" about the future? On what time horizon do imagined company futures appear?

Corporate history is fascinating to me. Despite the overwhelming documentation of "work" - the history of a company is largely (if not entirely) oral.

Rooted in a company's oral history are memories and myths of failed projects, company motivations, strategies, hires, fires, mistakes, successes and more.

How far back does your company "remember"?

What stories are often-repeated? Are they true? (does it matter?)

So - when we turn our attention from history to futures we start to unlock some interesting ways of thinking about a company and strategy.

How far into the future can we realistically predict a future? How do imagined futures of the world around us affect our own internal futures?

All things I'm mulling closely right now.

* Reference my long retention here as a way of seeing companies evolve over time.

Three fascinating and highly-recommended readings:

## Atemporality of the creative artist

> There are new asynchronous communication forms that are globalized and offshored, and there is the loss of a canon and a record. There is no single authoritative voice of history. Instead we get wildly empowered cranks, lunatics, and every kind of long-tail intellectual market appearing in network culture. Everything from brilliant insight to scurillous rumor.
> This really changes the narrative, and the organized presentations of history in a way that history cannot recover from. This is the source of our gnawing discontent.

https://www.wired.com/2010/02/atemporality-for-the-creative-artist/

## Present-tense Anthropology

>Then the Great Report would not be something that was either to-come or completed, in-the-past: it would be all now. Present-tense anthropology; anthropology as way-of-life. That was it: Present-Tense Anthropology™; an anthropology that bathed in presence, and in nowness—bathed in it as in a deep, bubbling and nymph-saturated well.
>And yet … And yet … And yet. The Great Report still had to be composed. That was the deal: with Peyman, with the age. Even if it wasn’t composed in a way that conformed to any previous anthropological model, it nonetheless had, somehow, to find a form. It was all a question of form. What fluid, morphing hybrid could I come up with to be equal to that task? What medium, or media, would it inhabit? Would it tell a story? If so, how, and about what, or whom? If not, how would it all congeal, around what cohere? How could I elevate the photos I had pinned about my walls, the sketches, doodles, musings, all the stuff cached on my hard-drive, the audio-files and diaries not my own—how could I elevate all these from secondary sources to be quantified, sucked dry, then cast away, to primary players in this story, or non-story? Above and beyond this, how could life as lived become transmogrified from field-work into work, the Work?

## Bifo After the Future
>however, from the standpoint of cognitive workers the supply of labor is fragmented: fractals of time and pulsating cells of labor are switched on and off in the large control room of global production


